[Doc Feature] [Requirements Targeting][3259380] (#11018)
MicrosoftDocs/msteams-docs: msteams-platform/m365-apps/specify-runtime-requirements.md

Reviewer: Shall we include all validation rules for RT properties? Did we do that previously when a new property was added to the manifest that also has validation rules associated with it? Here're all the validation rules for RT properties - [RT validation rules loop](https://microsoft.sharepoint-df.com/:fl:/g/contentstorage/CSP_10562c70-2745-4fc7-a9da-4a72a66dff42/EU1asRWVzTZBmIhRi5ZqHA8BChpoRMUZMgeQXSWRIsiXaQ?e=eoIrg2&nav=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%3D) . Note that Anuj might add some more per his actual implementation, but the current ones in the loop should cover majority of it.

Author: Validation rules aren't typically documented in manifest reference, as most should (hopefully) be implied by property descriptions. But I did add [this note to the RT article](https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/platform/m365-apps/specify-runtime-requirements?branch=pr-en-us-11018#specify-relationships-between-components-of-your-app-elementrelationshipset) based on the validation rules you shared: 

![image](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/msteams-docs/assets/2170770/cc08ca17-260d-441f-bc65-ce0edaeea18f)

Reviewer: Hmm, I do think in RT's case we might want to explicitly mention some validation rules, as they might not be so straightforward. At least the following tree from my loop doc should be mentioned I think, as they're not easily implied from the property name or description:

1. dependencies` (`element` / `commandIds`) specified in `oneWayDependencies` or `mutualDependencies` should exist in the manifest.  
2. [Updated from existing rule in schema to have more clarity] No cyclic dependencies in `oneWayDependencies`. ie (A -> B), (B -> A) or (A->B, B->C, C->A) will not be allowed. Developers should use `mutualDependencies` property for such scenarios.
3. Same set of `elements` wil not be allowed to have `mutualDependency` and `oneWayDependency`. Example - `oneWayDependency` A -> B, and `mutualDependency` A<->B will not be allowed since A->B is redundant here.

If you have a Teams app that contains a personal tab or message extension, you can easily [extend it to run across additional Microsoft 365 hosts](./overview.md), including Outlook and Microsoft 365 (Office) app across web, desktop, and mobile experiences. When you upgrade your Teams app to use app manifest version 1.13 or higher, your app is available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported across other Microsoft 365 hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.

To ensure intentional and deliberate customer experiences with your app, you can specify your app's runtime requirements in the app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts that you're not ready to support. Describing your app's runtime requirements in the app manifest also helps ensure your production-ready app experience will reach wider audiences in additional Microsoft 365 host applications in the future.

Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

> - **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes both a tab and message extension, and the tab functions as a settings page for users to configure message extension functionality, you can ensure that your settings tab doesn't load in hosts that don't support your message extension.

Reviewer 2: maybe define what one-way dependency relationship is, and then give an example of a tab and message extension?

- **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app components that must be loaded together in order to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support all components.  

- **Capability requirements:** When your app has component parts with runtime requirements that aren't supported across all applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, you can ensure those components are *seamlessly omitted* (rather than loaded, yet not functional) from your app experience running in those hosts.

## Microsoft 365 host support

Only a subset of Microsoft 365 host applications supports the ability to specify runtime requirements in the app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following hosts ensure only applicable apps and their applicable components are made available to users:

> |Microsoft 365 host application| Web | Desktop | Mobile |

Reviewer 2: We should probably add information about all the hosts and status (not available / coming soon).

Author: @juna-gupta, @ali-ms I added M365 app and Copilot to the table. Any other hosts I should add as rows?

Reviewer: No. It should be T/O/H + Copilot.

|---|---|---|---|
| Microsoft Teams| ✔️| ✔️| ✔️|
| Microsoft Outlook| ✔️| ✔️| ✔️|

## Specify relationships between components of your app (`elementRelationshipSet`)

You can specify relationships among the individual components of your app by including an [`elementRelationshipSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipset) in your app manifest. Use this object to specify both [one-way dependencies](#one-way-dependencies) and [mutual dependencies](#mutual-dependencies) among app components.

> [!NOTE]

> > A given pair of app components can only be grouped once, either by `oneWayDependency` or `mutualDependency`. Similarly, cyclical `oneWayDependencies`—where, for example, components *A* and *B* mutually declare each other as a one-way dependency—aren't allowed and will fail manifest validation.

Reviewer 2: Are we referring to bots / tabs as components or elements? We can be consistent in calling them elements.

Author: @juna-gupta I'm using the descriptive phrase "component of an app" to bridge the conceptual gap between Teams / MetaOS terminology. Teams docs generalize tabs/bots/MEs etc as "app capabilities"; MetaOS WG has been unofficially calling them "elements". I'm trying to use the generic phrase "app component" to describe RT for both Teams and new-to-M365 dev audiences

Reviewer 3: @erikadoyle, I suggest we use the term app capabilities.

        }
      ]
    }
```

For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app components. If those components aren't supported in the runtime host, they won't be made available to the user (though all other commands will run).

### Mutual dependencies

Use the [`mutualDependencies`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipsetmutualdependencies) array to group app components that must load together in order to support their intended function. Each object in the array represents a mutually dependent app component. The following JSON snippet shows a bot, static tab, message extension, and configurable tab that are mutually dependent on each other.

```json
    "elementRelationshipSet": {
      "mutualDependencies" : [
                {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}, 
                {"name" : "staticTabs", "id" : "staticTab-id"},
                {"name" : "composeExtensions", "id" : "composeExtension-id"},
                {"name" : "configurableTabs", "id": "configurableTab-id"}
      ]
    },
```

## Specify runtime capability requirements for specific app components (`requirementSet`)

> When you're defining an individual app component, you can specify its specific TeamsJS runtime requirements using a [`requirementSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset). This ensures that the component only loads in Microsoft 365 hosts with support for the critical TeamsJS capabilities. The following JSON snippet shows a static tab that requires its host to support both HTML dialogs invoked from tabs and HTML dialogs invoked from bots. 

Reviewer 2: we should use consistent naming - component / element.

---
title: Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest
description: Specify your app's runtime requirements in the app manifest to provide a deliberate experience on supported Microsoft 365 hosts. 
ms.date: 7/10/2024
ms.author: mosdevdocs
author: erikadoyle
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.localizationpriority: medium
ms.subservice: m365apps
---
# Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest (preview)

> [!NOTE]
>

> > The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in the app manifest is currently in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md) and supported in Teams and Outlook mobile hosts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest is currently in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md) and supported in Teams and Outlook mobile hosts.
```

Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

- **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes both a tab and message extension, and the tab functions as a settings page for users to configure message extension functionality, you can ensure that your settings tab doesn't load in hosts that don't support your message extension.

- **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app components that must be loaded together in order to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support all components.  

- **Capability requirements:** When your app has component parts with runtime requirements that aren't supported across all applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, you can ensure those components are *seamlessly omitted* (rather than loaded, yet not functional) from your app experience running in those hosts.

## Microsoft 365 host support

> Currently, a subset of Microsoft 365 host applications support the ability to specify runtime requirements in the app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following hosts will ensure only applicable apps and their applicable components are made available to end-users:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only a subset of Microsoft 365 host applications support the ability to specify runtime requirements in the app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following hosts ensure only applicable apps and their applicable components are made available to end-users:
```

|Microsoft 365 host application| Web | Desktop | Mobile | Notes|
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Microsoft Teams| ✔️| ✔️| ✔️| |
| Microsoft Outlook| | | ✔️| |

## Specify relationships between components of your app (`elementRelationshipSet`)

> You can specify relationships among the individual components of your app by including a [`elementRelationshipSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipset) in your app manifest. Use this object to specify both [one-way dependencies](#one-way-dependencies) and [mutual dependencies](#mutual-dependencies) among app components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can specify relationships among the individual components of your app by including an [`elementRelationshipSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipset) in your app manifest. Use this object to specify both [one-way dependencies](#one-way-dependencies) and [mutual dependencies](#mutual-dependencies) among app components.
```

Currently, a subset of Teams app elements can be specified as runtime requirements in the app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following app manifest elements can be specified as having one-way or mutual dependencies:

- Personal tabs (`staticTabs`)
- Message extensions (`composeExtensions`), including individual commands
- Bots (`bots`)
- Configurable tabs (`configurableTabs`)

Each app element is denoted by an `id`, which maps to `botId` for bots, `entityId` for staticTabs, `id` for configurableTabs, and `id` for composeExtensions.

> [!NOTE]
> This feature introduces `id` properties to configurableTabs and composeExtensions definitions. Currently, Teams and other Microsoft 365 hosts only support apps containing a single configurableTab and/or single composeExtension. These ID properties were added to future-proof your app in case host support expands to accommodate multiple instances of these components.
>

> > The `id` property must be specified on a configurableTab or composeExtension for it to be recognized in an `elementRelationshipSet`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The `id` property must be specified in a `configurableTab` or a `composeExtension` for it to be recognized in an `elementRelationshipSet`.
```

### One-way dependencies

> Use the [`oneWayDependencies`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipsetonewaydependency) array to describe cases where one component of your app depends upon another component. For each object in the array, specify the dependent component (`element`) and the component it depends on (`dependsOn`). For example:

Reviewer 4: > For example:
@erikadoyle, is it necessary to replace this sentence to describe the code snippet briefly (This extends to all the other code snippets in the article)? If you think it isn't necessary, resolve the suggestion.

Suggestion: The following JSON payload shows a message extension with a one-way dependency on a bot:

```json
    "elementRelationshipSet": {
      "oneWayDependencies" : [
        {
          "element" : {
            "name" : "composeExtensions",
            "id" : "composeExtension-id",

>             "commandIds": ["command-1-id", "command-2-id"]  // Developers can add more commands.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            "commandIds": ["command-1-id", "command-2-id"]  // You can add more commands.
```

Author: I'm going to remove this comment altogether; it doesn't seem useful.

          },
          "dependsOn" : [
              {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
```

> For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app components. If those components aren't supported in the runtime host, they will not be made available to the end-user (though all other commands will run).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app components. If those components aren't supported in the runtime host, they won't be made available to the user (though all other commands can run).
```

### Mutual dependencies

Use the [`mutualDependencies`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipsetmutualdependencies) array to group app components that must load together in order to support their intended function. Each object in the array represents a mutually dependent app component. For example:

```json
    "elementRelationshipSet": {
      "mutualDependencies" : [
                {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}, 
                {"name" : "staticTabs", "id" : "staticTab-id"},
                {"name" : "composeExtensions", "id" : "composeExtension-id"},
                {"name" : "configurableTabs", "id": "configurableTab-id"}
      ]
    },
```

## Specify runtime capability requirements for specific app components (`requirementSet`)

> When you're defining an individual app component, you can specify it's specific TeamsJS runtime requirements using a [`requirementSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset). This will ensure the component only loads in Microsoft 365 hosts with support for the critical TeamsJS capabilities. For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you're defining an individual app component, you can specify its specific TeamsJS runtime requirements using a [`requirementSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset). This will ensure the component only loads in Microsoft 365 hosts with support for the critical TeamsJS capabilities. For example:
```

```json
    "staticTabs": [
        {
            "entityId": "idForPage",
            "name": "Display name of tab",
            "contentUrl": "https://contoso.com/content?host=msteams",
            "contentBotId": "Specifies to the app that tab is an Adaptive Card Tab. You can either provide the contentBotId or contentUrl.",
            "websiteUrl": "https://contoso.com/content",
            "scopes": [
                "personal"
            ],
            "requirementSet": {
                "hostMustSupportFunctionalities": [
                  {"name": "dialogUrl"},
                  {"name": "dialogUrlBot"}
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
```

> Currently, a subset of TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for individual components of an app. This support will expand over time. The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for [`staticTabs`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset), [`composeExtensions`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#composeextensionsrequirementset), and [`bots`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#botsrequirementset):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only a subset of TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for individual components of an app. This support will expand over time. The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for [`staticTabs`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset), [`composeExtensions`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#composeextensionsrequirementset), and [`bots`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#botsrequirementset):
```

---

> title: Specify App Runtime Requirements for Microsoft 365

Author: We should retain "Microsoft 365" for SEO purposes--otherwise it sounds like it only applies to Teams-only apps.

> title: Specify App Runtime Requirements for Microsoft 365

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, according to [this](https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/help/platform/seo-meta-title?branch=main&branchFallbackFrom=main%22%20%5Ct%20%22_blank), meta titles can be max 65 characters. Since we append "- Teams | Microsoft Learn" to all meta titles by default, we are only left with 39 characters. Hence, I suggested we remove "for Microsoft 365".

description: Specify app runtime requirements, such as one-way or mutual dependencies and capabilities, to tailor user experience in different Microsoft 365 hosts.
ms.date: 7/10/2024
ms.author: mosdevdocs
author: erikadoyle
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.localizationpriority: medium
ms.subservice: m365apps
---
# Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest

> [!NOTE]
>
> The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest (previously called Teams app manifest) is in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md).

> When you upgrade your Microsoft Teams personal tab or message extension app to use app manifest version 1.13 or later, it's available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes capabilities not yet supported in these hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned user experiences.

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, do we need to mention bots here as well? The feedback from reviews is that we haven't mentioned that this feature applies to bots as well and that's not mentioned anywhere at the beginning, only to be suddenly mentioned under `elementRelationshipSet`.

Author: How about this (taken from a real-world partner problem that RT will solve): 

For example, if your app is defined with app manifest schema version 1.17 and includes a bot and a personal tab that represents the bot's configuration settings, your app would load in Outlook and Microsoft 365 (Office) app, but only surface the bot configuration tab to the user without the bot itself.

> To ensure high-quality app experiences while reaching the widest possible user audience, specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts you're not ready to support.

Author: "widest possible users" doesn't sound correct here.

> To ensure high-quality app experiences while reaching the widest possible user audience, specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts you're not ready to support.

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, is the new suggestion better?

Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

- **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes both a tab and message extension, and the tab functions as a settings page for users to configure message extension functionality, you can ensure that your settings tab doesn't load in hosts that don't support your message extension.

- **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app capabilities that must be loaded together to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support all capabilities.  

- **Capability requirements:** When your app has capabilities with runtime requirements that aren't supported across all applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, you can ensure those capabilities are *seamlessly omitted* (rather than loaded but not functional) from your app experience running in those hosts.

## Microsoft 365 host support

The following Microsoft 365 host applications support the ability to specify runtime requirements in app manifest:

|Microsoft 365 host application| Web | Desktop | Mobile |
|---|---|---|---|
| Teams| ✔️| ✔️| ✔️|

> | Outlook| ✔️| ✔️ (New Outlook only)| ✔️|

Author: For MetaOS documentation, the convention is to use "Outlook" and "Teams" (without needing to preface with _Microsoft_)

> | Outlook| ✔️| ✔️ (New Outlook only)| ✔️|

Reviewer 4: Agreed.

| Microsoft 365 (Office)| | | |

> | Copilot for Microsoft 365 | | | |

Author: Same for M365 Copilot (per comment above)

> | Copilot for Microsoft 365 | | | |

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, updated this comment according to the new guidelines.

- Tabs: personal (`staticTabs`) and configurable (`configurableTabs`)
- Message extensions (`composeExtensions`), including individual commands
- Bots (`bots`)

Each app capability is defined by the newly introduced property, `id`, which maps to `botId` for bots, `entityId` for static tabs, and `id` for configurable tabs and message extensions. Teams and other Microsoft 365 hosts support apps that contain either a single configurable tab, a single message extension, or both. The ID property future-proofs your app in case host support expands to accommodate multiple instances of these capabilities.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Ensure the relationships you create adhere to the following validation rules:
>
> 1. Elements specified under `elementRelationshipSet` must have definitions in app manifest. For example, an `element` or `commandId` listed in the `dependsOn` section of a `oneWayDependencies` object that doesn't have a corresponding definition in the manifest (with a matching `id` value) results in a manifest validation error. The `id` property must be specified in a `configurableTab` or a `composeExtension` for it to be recognized in an `elementRelationshipSet`.

> > 1. A given set of capabilities can only be grouped by a `mutualDependency` or `oneWayDependency`, but not both. For example, specifying both a one-way dependency (*A* depends on *B*) and a mutual dependency (*A* and *B* depend on each other) will result in a manifest validation error, because the *A depends on B* relationship is represented twice.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> 1. A given set of capabilities can only be grouped by a `mutualDependency` or `oneWayDependency`, but not both. For example, specifying both a one-way dependency (*A* depends on *B*) and a mutual dependency (*A* and *B* depend on each other) results in a manifest validation error, because the *A depends on B* relationship is represented twice.
```

> 1. Cyclical one-way dependencies aren't permitted. For example, specifying both an *A depends on B* relationship and a *B depends on A* relationship results in a manifest validation error.

### One-way dependencies

Use the `oneWayDependencies` array to describe cases where one component of your app depends upon another component. For each object in the array, specify the dependent component (`element`) and the component it depends on (`dependsOn`). The following JSON snippet shows specific message extension commands that have a one-way dependency on a bot:

```json
    "elementRelationshipSet": {
      "oneWayDependencies" : [
        {
          "element" : {
            "name" : "composeExtensions",
            "id" : "composeExtension-id",
            "commandIds": ["command-1-id", "command-2-id"]
          },
          "dependsOn" : [
              {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
```

> For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app capabilities. If those capabilities aren't supported in the runtime host, they won't be made available to the user (though all other commands will run).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app capabilities. If those capabilities aren't supported in the runtime host, they won't be made available to the user (though all other commands run).
```

### Mutual dependencies

> Use the `mutualDependencies` array to group app capabilities that must load together in order to support their intended function. Each object in the array represents a set of mutually dependent app capabilities. The following JSON snippet shows a bot, static tab, message extension, and configurable tab that are mutually dependent on each other:

Author: Trimming down the text here seems at the expense of providing clarity and explanation to the reader

> Use the `mutualDependencies` array to group app capabilities that must load together in order to support their intended function. Each object in the array represents a set of mutually dependent app capabilities. The following JSON snippet shows a bot, static tab, message extension, and configurable tab that are mutually dependent on each other:

Reviewer 4: Agreed.

            "name": "Display name of tab",
            "contentUrl": "https://contoso.com/content?host=msteams",
            "contentBotId": "Specifies to the app that tab is an Adaptive Card Tab. You can either provide the contentBotId or contentUrl.",
            "websiteUrl": "https://contoso.com/content",
            "scopes": [
                "personal"
            ],
            "requirementSet": {
                "hostMustSupportFunctionalities": [
                  {"name": "dialogUrl"},
                  {"name": "dialogUrlBot"}
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
```

The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for [`staticTabs`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset), [`composeExtensions`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#composeextensionsrequirementset), and [`bots`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#botsrequirementset):

- HTML-based dialogs (`dialog.url`)
- HTML-based dialogs for Bot Framework (`dialog.url.bot`)
- Adaptive Card dialogs (`dialog.adaptiveCard`)
- Adaptive Card dialogs for Bot Framework (`dialog.adaptiveCard.bot`)

> 

Author: Thanks for adding the sample link. Is the sample actually called "ElementRelationshipSet"?

> ## See also

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, can we link [Dialogs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/platform/task-modules-and-cards/what-are-task-modules) here?

> - [Developer preview app manifest reference](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md)

Author: This link is for manifest reference, not the schema itself, which is hosted at https://github.com/microsoft/json-schemas/tree/main/teams

---

> title: Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest

Author: If we truncate the title, it's not very clear what the article is about. Also we the casing should be upper only for the first word (and for product names)

> title: Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest

Reviewer 4: We're following the conventions laid out in [Meta Titles - Platform Manual | Microsoft Learn](https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/help/platform/seo-meta-title?branch=main&branchFallbackFrom=main%22%20%5Ct%20%22_blank).

> title: Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest

Author: Ah, interesting. Ok, I've updated (and added "App" for better context on the subject)

> description: Specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to provide a deliberate experience on supported Microsoft 365 hosts. 

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, we'd include more keywords in the meta description. Here's a suggestion:

```suggestion
description: Specify runtime requirements, such as one-way or mutual dependencies and capability requirements, in app manifest to tailor app experience in Microsoft 365.
```

Author: How about:

Specify app runtime requirements, such as one-way or mutual dependencies and capability requirements, to tailor its user experience in different Microsoft 365 host applications.

Reviewer 4: @erikadoyle, I've reduced the description you've suggested to <160 chars. Let me know what you think.

ms.date: 7/10/2024
ms.author: mosdevdocs
author: erikadoyle
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.localizationpriority: medium
ms.subservice: m365apps
---
# Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in your app manifest

> [!NOTE]
>

> > The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest is in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest (previously called Teams app manifest) is in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md).
```

> When you upgrade your Microsoft Teams personal tab or message extension app to use app manifest version 1.13 or later, it's available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported across other Microsoft 365 hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you upgrade your Microsoft Teams personal tab or message extension app to use app manifest version 1.13 or later, it's available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported in these hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.
```

> If you have a Microsoft Teams app that contains a personal tab or message extension, you can easily [extend it to run across additional Microsoft 365 hosts](./overview.md), including Microsoft Outlook and Microsoft 365 app. When you upgrade your Teams app to use app manifest version 1.13 or higher, your app is available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported across other Microsoft 365 hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.

Reviewer 4: For brevity:
```suggestion
When you upgrade your Microsoft Teams personal tab or message extension app to use app manifest version 1.13 or later, it's available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported across other Microsoft 365 hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.
```

> To ensure your app always provides customers with high quality experiences, you can specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts that you're not ready to support. Describing your app's runtime requirements in app manifest also helps ensure your production-ready app experience reaches wider audiences in additional Microsoft 365 host applications in the future.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure your app always provides customers with high-quality experiences, you can specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts that you're not ready to support. Describing your app's runtime requirements in app manifest also helps ensure your production-ready app experience reaches wider audiences in additional Microsoft 365 host applications in the future.
```

Author: Great suggestion. Small tweak:

To ensure high-quality app experiences while reaching the widest possible user audience, specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts you're not ready to support.

Reviewer 4: That sounds even better, @erikadoyle. I've updated the suggestion.

> Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

Author: This is all part of the intro / value prop, so I feel like it should stay at the top. Hopefully that convinces customers to read on, and then we would provide current status on **Microsoft 365 host support** and implementation details

- **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes both a tab and message extension, and the tab functions as a settings page for users to configure message extension functionality, you can ensure that your settings tab doesn't load in hosts that don't support your message extension.

- **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app components that must be loaded together in order to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support all components.  

- **Capability requirements:** When your app has component parts with runtime requirements that aren't supported across all applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, you can ensure those components are *seamlessly omitted* (rather than loaded, yet not functional) from your app experience running in those hosts.

## Microsoft 365 host support

> Only a subset of Microsoft 365 host applications supports the ability to specify runtime requirements in the app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following hosts ensure only applicable apps and their applicable components are made available to users:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only a subset of Microsoft 365 host applications supports the ability to specify runtime requirements in app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following hosts ensure only applicable apps and their applicable components are made available to users:
```

|Microsoft 365 host application| Web | Desktop | Mobile |
|---|---|---|---|
| Teams| ✔️| ✔️| ✔️|
| Outlook| ✔️| ✔️ (New Outlook only)| ✔️|
| Microsoft 365 (Office)| | | |
| Copilot for Microsoft 365 | | | |

> ## Specify relationships between components of your app (`elementRelationshipSet`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## `elementRelationshipSet`
```

Author: I think we should include the explanatory description here, along with the API name. Seems more user friendly?

Reviewer 4: User-friendly? Definitely. SEO-friendly? No. Search engines tend to pay less attention to headings after 60 characters.

Suggestion: _Specify relationships between components of your app_

> You can specify relationships among the individual components of your app by including an [`elementRelationshipSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipset) in your app manifest. Use this object to specify both [one-way dependencies](#one-way-dependencies) and [mutual dependencies](#mutual-dependencies) among app components.

Author: Removed the link to schema reference.

> > [!IMPORTANT]

Author: Combined the IMPORTANT and NOTE into a single callout

> 1. A given set of components can only be grouped by a `mutualDependency` or `oneWayDependency`, but not both. For example, specifying both a one-way dependency (*A* depends on *B*) and a mutual dependency (*A* and *B* depend on each other) will result in a manifest validation error, because the *A depends on B* relationship is represented twice.
> 1. Cyclical one-way dependencies aren't permitted. For example, specifying both an *A depends on B* relationship and a *B depends on A* relationship will result in a manifest validation error.

Only a subset of Teams app capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements in app manifest. This support will expand over time. The following app manifest elements can be specified as having one-way or mutual dependencies:

- Tabs: personal (`staticTabs`) and configurable (`configurableTabs`)
- Message extensions (`composeExtensions`), including individual commands
- Bots (`bots`)

Each app element is denoted by an `id`, which maps to `botId` for bots, `entityId` for static tabs, and `id` for configurable tabs and message extensions.

> This feature introduces `id` properties to `configurableTabs` and `composeExtensions` definitions. Teams and other Microsoft 365 hosts support apps that contain either a single configurable tab or a single message extension, or both. These ID properties future-proof your app in case host support expands to accommodate multiple instances of these components.

Author: I don't understand why we would want to omit this paragraph. Shouldn't we call out these new `id` properties and explain why they exist?

> This feature introduces `id` properties to `configurableTabs` and `composeExtensions` definitions. Teams and other Microsoft 365 hosts support apps that contain either a single configurable tab or a single message extension, or both. These ID properties future-proof your app in case host support expands to accommodate multiple instances of these components.

Author: Ah I see now that you combined this info into the update above.

> > [NOTE!]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

          "dependsOn" : [
              {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
```

For message extensions, you can optionally specify individual commands that require support for specific app components. If those components aren't supported in the runtime host, they won't be made available to the user (though all other commands will run).

### Mutual dependencies

Use the [`mutualDependencies`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#elementrelationshipsetmutualdependencies) array to group app components that must load together in order to support their intended function. Each object in the array represents a mutually dependent app component. The following JSON snippet shows a bot, static tab, message extension, and configurable tab that are mutually dependent on each other:

```json
    "elementRelationshipSet": {
      "mutualDependencies" : [
                {"name" : "bots", "id" : "bot-id"}, 
                {"name" : "staticTabs", "id" : "staticTab-id"},
                {"name" : "composeExtensions", "id" : "composeExtension-id"},
                {"name" : "configurableTabs", "id": "configurableTab-id"}
      ]
    },
```

> ## Specify runtime capability requirements for specific app components (`requirementSet`)

Author: I've updated with suggested text, but retained mention of requirementSet. Especially as H2, tying the scenario to the API name adds value for the reader (and SEO discoverability)

> ## Specify runtime capability requirements for specific app components (`requirementSet`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## `requirementSet`
```

Author: Same here, especially because this article is about teaching customers about RT. Let's lead with customer scenario, and then introduce our tech

When you're defining an individual app component, you can specify its specific TeamsJS runtime requirements using a [`requirementSet`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset). This ensures that the component only loads in Microsoft 365 hosts with support for the critical TeamsJS capabilities. The following JSON snippet shows a static tab that requires its host to support HTML dialogs invoked from tabs and bots: 

```json
    "staticTabs": [
        {
            "entityId": "idForPage",
            "name": "Display name of tab",
            "contentUrl": "https://contoso.com/content?host=msteams",
            "contentBotId": "Specifies to the app that tab is an Adaptive Card Tab. You can either provide the contentBotId or contentUrl.",
            "websiteUrl": "https://contoso.com/content",
            "scopes": [
                "personal"
            ],
            "requirementSet": {
                "hostMustSupportFunctionalities": [
                  {"name": "dialogUrl"},
                  {"name": "dialogUrlBot"}
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
```

> Only a subset of TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for individual components of an app. This support will expand over time. The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for [`staticTabs`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset), [`composeExtensions`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#composeextensionsrequirementset), and [`bots`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#botsrequirementset):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only a subset of TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for individual components of an app. The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for [`staticTabs`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#statictabsrequirementset), [`composeExtensions`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#composeextensionsrequirementset), and [`bots`](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md#botsrequirementset):
```

Author: That's a good idea once we have critical mass, but there are only 4 sub-capabilities to list for initial public preview, hence the bullet list

If you have a Teams app that contains a personal tab or message extension, you can easily [extend it to run across additional Microsoft 365 hosts](./overview.md), including Outlook and Microsoft 365 (Office) app across web, desktop, and mobile experiences. When you upgrade your Teams app to use app manifest version 1.13 or higher, your app is available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes components that aren't yet supported across other Microsoft 365 hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned and unsupported user experiences.

To ensure intentional and deliberate customer experiences with your app, you can specify your app's runtime requirements in the app manifest to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts that you're not ready to support. Describing your app's runtime requirements in the app manifest also helps ensure your production-ready app experience will reach wider audiences in additional Microsoft 365 host applications in the future.

Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

> - **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes a message extension component with an action command that requires bot-sent Adaptive Card functionality, you can ensure that particular command isn't available in message extension hosts that don't support bots, such as Outlook.

Reviewer: Actually Outlook now even deprioritizes actionME support. So the botSentCard actionME scenario isn't an urgent one to support now. The botSentCard one's urgency is more on Copilot host support - actionME is now previewing in BizChat, but BizChat doesn't support bot so we want to omit the botSentCard actionME showing up in BizChat by not letting BizChat pick it as a skill.

That said, for narrative purpose for oneWayDepend, I suggest we use this example "have a tab that's a settings tab for app's ME which really contains the hero use case, and the tab shouldn't show on host not supporting ME, e.g. Harmony".  More details in RT spec.

Author: Sounds good--I swapped out the scenario for the suggested.

> - **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app components that must be loaded together in order to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support both components.  

Reviewer: Nit in last part of the sentence - "...in Microsoft 365 hosts that support **both** components", **both** => **all**

```json
    "staticTabs": [
        {
            "entityId": "idForPage",
            "name": "Display name of tab",
            "contentUrl": "https://contoso.com/content?host=msteams",
            "contentBotId": "Specifies to the app that tab is an Adaptive Card Tab. You can either provide the contentBotId or contentUrl.",
            "websiteUrl": "https://contoso.com/content",
            "scopes": [
                "personal"
            ],
            "requirementSet": {
                "hostMustSupportFunctionalities": [
                  {"name": "dialogUrl"},
                  {"name": "dialogUrlBot"}
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
```

Currently, a subset of TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for individual components of an app. This support will expand over time. The following TeamsJS capabilities can be specified as runtime requirements for `staticTabs`, `composeExtensions`, and `bots`:

> - HTML-based dialogs (`dialog.url`)

Reviewer: Just gentle reminder, but I suppose it'll be part of your TODO Erika to add cross-referencing to these capabilities. :)

Author: The new sections in manifest reference already point to RT article, and I've just pushed an update w/links from RT article to manifest reference.

- Adaptive Card dialogs ([`dialog.adaptiveCard`](/javascript/api/@microsoft/teams-js/dialog.adaptivecard))
- Adaptive Card dialogs for Bot Framework ([`dialog.adaptiveCard.bot`](/javascript/api/@microsoft/teams-js/dialog.adaptivecard.bot))

The following JSON snippet shows a static tab that requires its host to support HTML dialogs (referred to as task modules in TeamsJS v1.x) invoked from tabs and bots: 

```json
    "staticTabs": [
        {
            "entityId": "idForPage",
            "name": "Display name of tab",
            "contentUrl": "https://contoso.com/content?host=msteams",
            "contentBotId": "Specifies to the app that tab is an Adaptive Card Tab. You can either provide the contentBotId or contentUrl.",
            "websiteUrl": "https://contoso.com/content",
            "scopes": [
                "personal"
            ],
            "requirementSet": {
                "hostMustSupportFunctionalities": [
                  {"name": "dialogUrl"},
                  {"name": "dialogUrlBot"}
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
```

## Code samples

| Sample name | Description | JavaScript |
|----------------|-----------------|--------------|

> | ElementRelationshipSet | This sample app demonstrates how to specify runtime requirements, such as one-way or mutual dependencies and app capabilities, to tailor app experience across different Microsoft 365 hosts. | [View](https://github.com/OfficeDev/Microsoft-Teams-Samples/tree/main/samples/app-hello-world/nodejs) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| RT Sample App | This sample app demonstrates how to specify runtime requirements for one-way dependencies and app capabilities, and tailor the app experience across different Microsoft 365 hosts. | [View](https://github.com/OfficeDev/Microsoft-Teams-Samples/tree/main/samples/requirement-targeting-oneway-dependency/nodejs) |
| RT-Sample-App | This sample app demonstrates how to specify runtime requirements for mutual dependencies and app capabilities, and tailor the app experience across different Microsoft 365 hosts. | [View](https://github.com/OfficeDev/Microsoft-Teams-Samples/tree/main/samples/requirement-targeting-mutual-dependency/nodejs) |
```

Author: Tweaked your suggestion slightly with further details in the names / descriptions.

ms.date: 10/14/2024
ms.author: mosdevdocs
author: erikadoyle
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.localizationpriority: medium
ms.subservice: m365apps
---
# Specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest

> [!NOTE]
>
> The ability to specify Microsoft 365 host runtime requirements in app manifest (previously called Teams app manifest) is in [public developer preview](../resources/schema/manifest-schema-dev-preview.md).

When you upgrade your Microsoft Teams personal tab or message extension app to use app manifest version 1.13 or later, it's available in other Microsoft 365 application hosts by default. However, if your app also includes capabilities not yet supported in certain hosts, your app might only partially load, resulting in unplanned user experiences.

For example, consider an app that is defined with app manifest schema version 1.17 and includes a bot and a configuration tab that represents the bot's settings. The app would load in Outlook and Microsoft 365 (Office) app, but only surface the bot configuration tab to the user without the bot itself.

> To ensure high-quality app experiences and reach a wider user base, specify your app's runtime requirements in app manifest. This allows you to tailor its behavior in applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, or omit it from surfacing in contexts you're not ready to support.

Reviewer 5: We should not state 'reach a wider user base' as that is contrarian to what the feature does - restrict the app surfacing in hubs where certain features are not supported. Please remove this.

Author: Thanks, good catch! Removed and reworded.

Specifying your app's runtime requirements is useful in scenarios such as:

- **One-way dependencies**: If your app includes both a tab and message extension, and the tab functions as a settings page for users to configure message extension functionality, you can ensure that your settings tab doesn't load in hosts that don't support your message extension.

> - **Mutual dependencies:** When your app has specific app capabilities that must be loaded together to function properly, you can ensure your app is *only available* in Microsoft 365 hosts that support all capabilities.  

Reviewer 5: Consider adding examples similar to one-way dependency for providing more clarity to the reader.

Author: Good idea--added example scenarios for both mutual dependencies and capability reqs.

> - **Capability requirements:** When your app has capabilities with runtime requirements that aren't supported across all applicable Microsoft 365 hosts, you can ensure those capabilities are *seamlessly omitted* (rather than loaded but not functional) from your app experience running in those hosts.

Reviewer 5: Consider adding examples similar to one-way dependency for providing more clarity to the reader.

Author: Added examples and reworked all 3 bullets here for consistency.
